---
layout: post
title: Reflections on three years with cancer
---

<em>Three years and counting. But why do I count?</em>

I have been dueling with the wily specter of uncertainty for a while now. Like most people, I have always casually engaged it on those certain occasions when the circumstances seemed to fit. But lately, it seems that the circumstances have fit each and every day. It began three years ago, when the doctors finally got around to telling me that I had a rare form of leukemia. “Cancer,” they said, and as soon as the word “cancer” hit my ears, I was already preparing myself for the long and arduous struggle of getting myself cured. Lying in the hospital bed, anticipating the inevitable, my mind reeled in apprehensive contemplation of what it would be like to endure months of intense chemotherapy. I prepared myself for a temporary life without hair. I pondered the inherent boredom of living in a virtual bubble, sealed off from the outside world, waiting for months until my immune system returned. And I imagined that, though it would be grueling and lengthy, at the end of it all, I would be cured and could return to life as normal. I could be certain of things.

But, as it turns out, certainty is a squirmy beast. Nobody’s ever been able to catch it. And nobody ever will.

The last thing you expect to hear when you are diagnosed with cancer is the old doctor’s cliché, “take two of these and call me in the morning,” but that’s essentially what I got. In 2002 the front-line treatment for Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) was not chemotherapy or interferon-alpha or radiation treatment; it was, and still is, a small orange pill containing a chemical compound known as imatinib mesylate, more commonly called Gleevec. Gleevec, a product of years of intense medical research and tremendous advances in the understanding of human genetic make-up, is the darling of the cancer community. Some people refer to it as the “magic cancer bullet” – a revolutionary break-through in the treatment of cancer. And it is. But that’s also the problem with it. It’s a treatment, and not necessarily a cure.

I could say that Gleevec saved my life, but a more accurate statement would be that Gleevec continues to save my life each and every day. It’s not like an antibiotic where, after you take it for a couple of weeks, the disease is gone and you can return to life as normal. No, with Gleevec you have to keep taking it … indefinitely. Nobody knows how long it will last, or when and if it will ever stop working. When I first started taking the medication, that hazy and surreal morning following my cancer diagnosis, the longest that any patient had been treated with Gleevec was about five years. In the world of cancer five years is a long time, a significant increase in life expectancy, but when you’re twenty-one years old, as I was at the time, five years seemed like nothing. Five years would have put me at a mere twenty-six. Add to this the very real possibility that Gleevec could fail at any time before those five years were through, and you start to get a sense of the very definite uncertainty in the whole matter. In a sense, it’s actually very similar to the current situation with AIDS. It’s almost like you’re just postponing the inevitable. The only real question is whether the disease will get you first or whether you’ll perish some other way.

Nothing drove this point home for me like the day a good friend of my father’s, who was also a CML patient and who was also being treated with Gleevec, passed away. One day Gleevec just stopped working for him, and not more than three months after that he was gone, a victim of a failed bone marrow transplant. The intense chemotherapy was too much, and his broken immune system failed him in the end. Though I never let anybody know how much this man’s death affected me, I can assure you that it affected me a great deal. The uncertainty of it all became very real that day. The wily specter became nearly tangible.

But death is not really the issue I struggled with. Nobody really fears death. What people fear is the <em>possibility of imminent death</em>; the chance that you might die very soon, before you consider yourself “ready.” They fear uncertainty and lack of preparedness. For instance, let’s say you are thirty years old now, and I have some magic crystal ball that tells you that you are going to die in sixty years, when you are ninety. Upon hearing this news you probably wouldn’t be too concerned. By then, you’d think, you will be ready, having lived a full and prosperous life. If, however, that same crystal ball told you with absolute certainty that you are going to die tomorrow, your level of anxiety would probably skyrocket – and you’d walk away feeling simultaneously cheated, nervous and scared.

It’s a bizarre psychology because whether it happens tomorrow, or whether it happens after ten-thousand tomorrows, it’s going to happen. You will die. And though the preceding might sound quite fatalistic, I prefer the term “realistic.” From day one I’ve never been interested in false hope. I never wanted to insulate myself from the very real threat of what I was up against, teetering on the precipice of the darkest of chasms when the slightest of wind could have pushed me off the edge. It was this direct, in-your-face confrontation with my own mortality that made the cancer more than just cancer. It became an invitation to experience life.

It’s not an easy invitation to accept, though. Once you accept this invitation you have to continue to accept it, because choosing to experience life in its fullest is not some decision you can make once and then simply wash your hands of. No, it’s something you have to choose to do each and every day – each and every moment no less. But it’s one thing to choose and quite another to know how to best go about it. What is life, anyway? And what does it mean to experience it in its fullest? These are philosophical questions that people have asked and debated for thousands of years. I’d venture that it’s safe to say that nearly every person on the planet asks these questions in some form or another. The difference is in depth of exploration. The incessantly distracting milieu of 21st century materialism, with its terrifying speed and never-ending gamut of mind-occupying activities makes it all too easy to give these questions nothing more than a superficial treatment. The culture of our times is primed towards maintaining an overriding apathetic attitude to nothing more than the mere surface aspects of human existence. But underneath, the questions remain, and as someone intimately reminded of the uncertainty of his life on a daily basis, I cannot ignore them.

To me, the question, “How can I best experience life?” is pragmatic by its very nature, and so I am most concerned with pragmatic philosophy. From my cancer experience I came to realize that the only thing I know for certain is what I’m experiencing at this very moment, and to fall in love with this moment is really what it’s all about. A truly pragmatic philosophy and accompanying psychology forces direct confrontation – a full-on encounter – with what is happening right now. It does not attempt to console or otherwise assuage the often-painful experience of existence. Painful or not, that’s what is; that is the beauty of living.

So, experiencing life, so far as I’m concerned, entails remaining present as it unfolds. Simple enough, right? Well, 99.9% of the population, including myself, can’t do this. This inability to experience life fully, I believe, is the chief symptom of a peculiar sickness of our times – a sickness whereby our natural egotistical tendencies have been exacerbated by a superficial cultural philosophy foisted upon us since birth. While life is happening, our minds are elsewhere. Which is why I’ve come to terms with the fact that the common notion of “ready,” in so far as it relates to living a good, lengthy and “meaningful” life before death is basically, well, bullshit. All of this anticipation. All of this expectation. What for? Lost in the imagined future we’ve forgotten the only thing that’s real: now.

Recently, a friend of mine mentioned how she couldn’t wait to get married and have kids so that she could, “finally get her life started.” It was a bit disconcerting, this inane belief that her life hadn’t already started, but that it would as soon as certain conditions could be met. I wondered how she accounted for the past twenty-four years of her existence. Were they inconsequential? If she died tomorrow would she never have lived at all?

Our thinking guided by analogy, we often liken life to a journey. But the only way in which I see how you could actually describe life as a journey is as a journey from the maternity ward to the crematorium. And if that’s how you see things, you might as well go ahead and shoot yourself right now. Get it over with – take the shortcut. After all, the whole point of a journey is getting to the destination, right? So why not shorten the distance? That’s how we think about things these days. We race around on the freeways, darting from here to there, looking for any chance we have to “save time” and get the trip over with. For us the shortest distance as a straight line between two points isn’t enough anymore. Supersonic jet travel isn’t enough. With teleconferencing and the Internet we can eliminate the distance entirely – squeezing the two points into one, no journey required.

No, life is not a journey. The philosopher Alan Watts got it best when he provided a much more suiting alternative analogy, describing life as a never-ending symphony, a perpetual tapestry of song and music. “In music,” he says, “one does not make the end of a composition the point of the composition. If that were the case then the best conductors would play the fastest. And there would be composers who wrote only finales. And people would go to concerts just to hear one crashing chord, because that’s the end!”

Life is music. And so, on this, the third anniversary of my cancer diagnosis, I’m going to take some time to actually listen to the music. I’m not going to try wax nostalgic on all the beautiful notes in measures gone by, and I’m not going to try to anticipate the future of the melody either. Instead, I will just listen, knowing that eventually that final crashing chord will come, but when and where I concern myself not. Uncertainty is part of the score.

