---
layout: post
title: Science, another rock in the river
---

Is science under attack in America today? According to [some journalists and scientists](http://news.yahoo.com/s/nm/20051028/sc_nm/science_usa_dc) the answer is yes. With the recent moral controversies surrounding new advances in biological science, along with the whole intelligent design debacle, I would have to agree. The problem, however, is far deeper than the surface alludes.

First of all, America is dominated by a certain egocentric culture — a worship of individualized, independent selfhood. You see it in our media, our advertising, our way of life. Our affinity for crafting unique, independent identities for ourselves largely consists of separating ourselves by splitting off into certain groups that we think are congruent with our likes and dislikes. We give names to these associative facets of our identity, saying I am a Christian or I am a Raiders fan or I am a conservative or I am an environmentalist. What you get as a result, then, is massive ethnocentrism. (I use ethnocentrism loosely here, referring to attaching oneself and strongly identifying with any group.) This is an ethnocentrism that is most evident in the current polarization in America between the so-called “reds” and “blues.” Ethnocentrism — the ego attaching itself to some group in order to have an identity — breeds conflict in the form of a positive feedback loop. Egos never relinquish their position during conflict, they only hold onto it more tightly. They only defend their group more vehemently.

In times of global ethnocentrism, conflict, and uncertainty — as the United States now faces through terrorist threats and then readily propagandizes — you get fear. When people are afraid they want security, hence the recent rise of neo-conservatism. After all, there’s nothing more secure than having God on your side, right? Dogma, belief, and faith all provide a certain psychological security. They don’t, of course, provide any real physical security — in fact the resulting polarization only exacerbates the problem — but they do provide security of mind. And like a solid rock in a river of ever-flowing change, people cling to security of mind. And they will defend that rock with attention and vigor.

That’s the problem some people have with science. Science, when followed properly, shuns security of mind because it has a systematic methodology for disproving itself. Its history is full of ideological upheavals. How many scientists have been called crackpots for going against the prevalent theory of their time? Copernicus with his heliocentrism. Alfred Wegener for the theory of continental drift. The Wright Brothers in their attempt to fly. (There are plenty [more examples](http://amethodnotaposition.blogspot.com/2005/10/how-to-become-crackpot.html).)

The funny thing is that although scientists know all of this, many of them still cling to whatever the prevailing scientific theory happens to be. Right now that theory happens to be evolution. And some of them cling to evolution as if it were another rock in the river; as if it were a dogma or a religion like all the others. Scientists should note, however, that science is not a philosophical position — empiricism is — but science is a methodology, and it’s a methodology for investigating truth. There are, however, certain things outside of its epistemological domain. The concept of God is one of those things. As Blaise Pascal once said, “Reason’s last step is to understand that there are some things which are beyond it.”

Now, if scientists and non-scientists alike were to truly understand this, teaching intelligent design in science classes would cease to be an issue. God is outside the domain of science. Intelligent design is not science because it’s not a methodology; it’s a position. Teach it in philosophy class if you must, but not science class. Science cannot comment on God or non-God. (Scientists can, but they can’t use science to back their claims. Scientists like Richard Dawkins and Steven Pinker should not use science as a tool to promote atheism.) A true scientific position is no position — agnostic.

As long as people keep clinging to their ideas, beliefs, and paradigms — their rocks in the river — this conflict between religion and science will never cease. It’s a conflict that can’t be won by either side. Beliefs are self-justifying.

When will people stop turning their beliefs into knowings and just be honest? When will people let go of their rocks and just learn how to swim? When will people finally just admit: “I don’t know?” As long as we continue to live in a world that worships the ego, the answer is probably never.

