---
layout: post
title: God, causation, correlation
---

It’s amazing how frequently studies and statistics are misconstrued for the purposes of demonstrating causality when they actually show no such thing. Sloppy journalism is usually the culprit. For instance, the first sentence of recent article in The Times, entitled [Societies worse off when they have God on their side](http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,2-1798944,00.html) says:

> Religious belief can *cause* damage to a society, contributing towards high murder rates, abortion, sexual promiscuity and suicide, according to research published today. (Emphasis mine.)

Interestingly enough, the study cited in this article does not conclusively show that religious belief causes any of these things. Indeed, if there were ever a study that could conclusively prove this it would be quite remarkable. Fortunately or unfortunately (depending on your point of view) there is no proof of cause here. There is, however, proof of correlation — highly religious societies, namely the U.S., do tend to have higher murder rates, abortion rates, etc. However, cause and correlation are substantially different (though related) concepts, and it seems that the author of this article is ignorant of this fact. (A quick read through Steven Levitt’s [Freakonomics](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=eatorange-20%26link_code=xm2%26camp=2025%26creative=165953%26path=http://www.amazon.com/gp/redirect.html%253fASIN=006073132X%2526tag=eatorange-20%2526lcode=xm2%2526cID=2025%2526ccmID=165953%2526location=/o/ASIN/006073132X%25253FSubscriptionId=0EMV44A9A5YT1RVDGZ82) could remedy the situation.)

In fact, the conclusion that religion actually causes these social problems is highly dubious. Although it’s possible this is the case, it’s far more likely that, at least in the U.S., these problems stem from a highly individualistic, egocentric, self-dependent cultural attitude. This attitude is epitomized in the form of the American Dream: a large, secluded house in the suburbs, a nice car you can parade around the neighborhood in, and a cushy job that you worked very hard to acquire. It’s very competititve attitude, and one that isn’t found in such severity in Europe and other first-world, secular nations.

The lack of social capital in the form of interdependent community that results from this American “I’ll-do-it-myself-attitude” is partly the reason why people seek it outside the civic arena, usually in the form of a religious community or a church. In this sense, you could say that the heavy religious belief is actually a result of increased crime, promiscuity, etc. and not the other way around. In fact, you could also say it helps stave off further social problems, by providing some sense of community in a culture where it’s often found lacking.

At the same time, the polarization that results when people get attached to faith (or, equally, strong secularism) leads to all sorts of strife and can be socially debilitating, as was evident in the most recent U.S. presidential election. As such, the article’s claim that “the United States is almost always the most dysfunctional of the developing democracies, sometimes spectacularly so,” is not all that surprising. But to say this is largely due to religion might be going a little too far. There’s a reason so many U.S. citizens are drawn to strong religious conviction in the first place, when citizens of so many other democratic first-world nations are not, and that’s what these sociologists should really be examining.

