---
layout: post
title: IxD for meetings
---

Last Wednesday, when I was speaking at the [Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals](http://www.cscmp.org/) conference in San Antonio, a conference staffer approached me after my presentation and asked me to load my Powerpoint file (which was actually a Keynote file) onto a USB jump drive. I assumed that the file would be distributed to conference attendees over the Internet, which seemed like a perfectly reasonable thing to do. But here’s the problem: by themselves, my Keynote slides were pretty much worthless. The slide with the most information on it probably contained about 5 words. Why? Because, I follow the [Edward Tufte approach](http://www.edwardtufte.com/tufte/powerpoint) to Powerpoint presentations. Namely, I don’t use slides to disseminate information. I use my voice, my stories and handouts. I consider it a part of good presentation design.

Here’s something to consider: With so much of the interaction design world focused on the design of Internet-based, high-tech products and services, it’s easy to overlook how the same design ideas, processes and methodologies can be applied to something as low-tech as an in-person meeting or presentation.

I spent the last two-years of my life working not as a designer or as a software developer, but as a management consultant. Most of my time was spent designing and facilitating workshops and meetings on everything from strategic planning to leadership to team dynamics and communication. Being a person who has a passion for making things, it wasn’t the facilitation of these events that intrigued me so much as it was the design and pre-planning that went into them. It never ceases to amaze me how so many people (and I’m as guilty as the next person) spend so little effort designing their meetings, workshops or presentations, and yet good event design is perhaps the second-most vital ingredient to success (good facilitation being the #1 most vital ingredient, and having the right people being the #3 most vital).

In his book, [Designing for Interaction](http://www.amazon.com/gp/redirect.html%3FASIN=0321432061%26tag=eatorange-20%26lcode=xm2%26cID=2025%26ccmID=165953%26location=/o/ASIN/0321432061%253FSubscriptionId=0EMV44A9A5YT1RVDGZ82), [Dan Saffer](http://www.odannyboy.com/) lists what he considers the key characteristics of interaction design: trustworthy, smart, clever, appropriate, responsive, ludic and pleasurable. Here, I’m going to attempt to describe how these same characteristics apply equally as well to the successful design of presentations, workshops, seminars, and meetings. Let’s try it:

1. **Clever:** Mind your seating. It’s amazing the impact something like seating arrangement has on the dynamics of a gathering. As always, consider your objectives and your audience. Circular arrangements (either open or around circular tables) are far more effective in getting people to engage in dialogue than classroom-style rows or any other linear configuration. And small clusters of circles between 4 – 8 people are far better than one large circle. If your audience is a bunch of engineers or programmers — people who tend to be introverts around strangers — the circular arrangement is almost always the way to go. Move chairs as necessary for maximum effect. Before my session at the supply chain conference, we rearranged all the chairs into circles. It was amazing how many people were absolutely shocked to find this arrangement when walking into the room, having been so accustomed to lecture-style seating at every other session.
2. **Trustworthy:** Open up. Tell relevant stories about yourself, because people need to be able to relate to you and trust you. Being an expert in your field isn’t enough. And, besides, if they can’t relate to you then they can’t understand you, and if they can’t understand you then why are you talking? Interaction design is about creating tools that enable people to connect — presentation design is the same thing.
3. **Ludic:** Make it interactive. Don’t lecture. Lectures are booooring. Some people go to workshops or conferences thinking they can just sit in the back of the room and either zone out or not participate. I don’t like these people. Many speakers allow this sort of behavior, and lecturing actually encourages it. But learning only happens through interaction, first-hand experiences and open dialogue, not one-way absorption of information that’s bound to be forgotten within the hour. Use your monologue speaking time to tell stories or give startling factoids that spark new thinking, then come up with some short activities that participants (not listeners) can engage in together. They’ll learn more from each other than they will from you, and it’ll be far more fun. This has the double bonus effect of saving your voice and giving the audience a memorable and worthwhile learning experience.
4. **Smart:** Tufte says that with Powerpoint the rate of information asymptotically approaches zero with each successive slide. I tend to agree. If I’m going to use slides, I put emotionally stirring images or key words in bold type on the slides with a solid color or subtle gradient background. The visual does nothing more than emphasize a point I’m making verbally, while making sure I keep the talk on track. Create paper handouts and use those instead to deliver information — they double as a memorable takeaway, especially for the many people who don’t take notes.
5. **Appropriate:** Just like designing a product, it’s important to know your users, or in this case, your audience. Create personas if you want. My presentation to the supply chain managers may have been about something as seemingly off-topic as mindfulness and meditation, but I geared it towards how meditation could be used as a tool for stress reduction and greater fulfillment in the life of a supply chain manager. Tailor your presentation appropriately — which basically means don’t try to write down and memorize some speech. Trash the script.
6. **Responsive:** This one goes hand-in-hand with the previous. Get people engaged by asking questions of the audience and soliciting answers, even if you have to force them out. After activities, get people to share their thoughts and feelings. This lets you know where people are coming from and allows you to respond by adapting the rest of the session on the fly.
7. **Pleasurable:** Keep it short and be emotionally moving — either with humor or inspiration. I personally suck at the inspirational talk, but I can usually manage a few laughs here and there with funny stories or images that illustrate a point. And, as Shakespeare said, “brevity is the soul of wit.”

I’m by no means an expert at this type of thing, but I’ve done it enough and seen even more than enough to know what works and what doesn’t. A well-designed presentation will go a long way to helping you make a successful presentation, even if you’re not the world’s greatest speaker (and I know I’m not). Of course, it only goes so far, and I can’t help you if you talk in monotone like Ben Stein.

