---
layout: post
title: Designing the mobile UX
---

There’s an [excellent article on UX Matters](http://www.uxmatters.com/MT/archives/000129.php) by Richard Cecil on the subject of what it takes to design great user experiences for mobile technology and the mobile Web. In particular, Cecil comments on the fact that ”... achieving simplicity and speed of access is the key to expanding people’s perceptions of the mobile Web to include information, entertainment, and commerce services. If people are to use these services while they are on the go, we must avoid cramming as many features as possible into them …” Namely, the point, as is always the point in interaction design, is to understand your users, avoid unnecessary complexity and manage the rest of the complexity through great design.

When it comes to mobile technology, the United States is notorious for being a slow adopter compared with much of Europe and Asia. The mobile Web is slow to catch on here. I think this is partially a matter of the technology adapting to our expansive geography (high-speed coverage), but also because the mobile phone companies and hardware designers don’t seem to understand the typical American’s needs when it comes to mobile technology. Most people I talk to, even young, hip, technologically-savvy people, don’t seem to care much about getting broadband streaming video on their phones. Yet, that is exactly what every carrier, from Sprint to Verizon to upstart Helio, is pushing on people. Most Americans also rarely, if ever, use the camera that comes built-in to their phones. (Take a look at [this video](http://www.veotag.com/player/?u=wgcqpthubc) of Guy Kawasaki interviewing high-school and college students on how they use technology if you don’t believe me. These people are supposed to be the biggest mobile phone camera users!) Yet, you’ll be hard-pressed to find a mobile phone today that doesn’t include a camera.

I use my current phone for two things — making calls and sending text messages. I just ordered a new Blackberry Pearl. It’s supposed to arrive tomorrow. While the Pearl offers a camera, video and MP3/AAC playback, I doubt I’ll use those features very frequently. I got it mainly for e-mail, calendaring, instant messaging and GPS/mapping capabilities. I use my phone purely as a social connection tool — my iPod supplies the media, but I mostly use it as a music player in my car … hardly what you’d consider “mobile.”

Cecil says that “two major reasons why people do not use mobile devices as more than social connection tools are excessively complicated services and devices.” He quotes John Maeda’s tenth Law of Simplicity: “Simplicity is about subtracting the obvious, and adding the meaningful.” We need simplicity, but we also need to understand what people are using these devices and services for and then design accordingly. The reigning phone use paradigm is one such that we expect the device to require short, intermittent bursts of attention, not long periods of focus. Do people really want to use their phone to watch news broadcasts or sports highlights? Are people ready for that? I’m not so sure … ESPN Mobile already found out the hard way.

