---
layout: post
title: Zero, the biography of a dangerous idea
---

I studied a lot of math in college. Not nearly as much as the masochists who chose to study math as an actual major, but enough to quickly stomp out any lingering fondness I had for the subject over the course of my freshman year alone. Of course, it’s not like I had a choice. It was foisted upon me by the powers that be — the powers that decide what a young computer science graduate such as myself should know before entering the working world: 3-dimensional calculus, matrix transformations, differential equations, statistics, number theory, etc. Fortunately, in the end, I had the upper hand in the matter; I managed to forget nearly everything I learned about math by the time I graduated.

My decision to purchase [Zero: The Biography of a Dangerous Idea](http://www.amazon.com/gp/redirect.html%3FASIN=0140296476%26tag=eatorange-20%26lcode=xm2%26cID=2025%26ccmID=165953%26location=/o/ASIN/0140296476%253FSubscriptionId=0EMV44A9A5YT1RVDGZ82) was thus a bit of a gamble. Or, more accurately, it was more of an experiment. I had four hours of coach-class-crammed-in-the-middle-seat-United-Airlines joy ahead of me, and I wanted to see if a book on math, of all things, could actually make those four hours even minimally bearable. Imagine my surprise, then, when it more than exceeded my expectations. And then some.

“Zero” is as much book on the history of philosophy as it is a book on the history of mathematics. It begins, as all stories do, at the beginning — tracing the history of zero (and its equally mysterious and controversial counterpart, infinity) from its inception, then through its childhood years in exile from Greek mathematics, and finally to its eventual embrace, first in the East and later in the West, serving as the crucial missing piece required for the advent of calculus and modern mathematics. Zero, it turns out, is so strange a concept that we take it’s modern-day ubiquity for granted. But it took thousands of years for the idea to achieve the status it has today. Early civilizations had no use for it, because in a world where math is primarily used for counting, zero serves no purpose. The Greeks and Medieval Europeans banned it, because to embrace zero was to embrace its counterpart infinity, and embracing infinity meant abandoning the Aristotolean philosophy of a finite universe. It wasn’t until its obvious practical usefulness began to outweigh its supposed “negative” philosophical implications, first during the Renaissance and later during the Enlightenment, that zero finally got the status it deserved.

What fascinated me most about this book were the small details: why zero is called “zero” in the first place, how the modern Arabic numeral system evolved over time, why the enigmatic Frenchman L’Hopital gets all the credit for the now famous (well, famous to math geeks, scientists and engineers) L’Hopital’s rule. I never in my wildest dreams thought a book on mathematics could be a page-turner, but this book managed to keep my undivided attention the entire time. It almost made me want to break out my old calculus textbook for a quick refresher on integration. Almost. If you have any background in advanced mathematics — calculus, etc. — then I can almost guarantee you’ll like this book as much as I did.

