---
title: Recently, April/May 2024
description: Favorite reading, listens and miscellanea from April and May.
---

I failed to post an update in April—and here we are approaching mid-June!—so I’m
rolling April and May updates into a single post.

In April I started learning [Go](https://go.dev/), which has been—in my
experience—the easiest programming language ever to pick up and learn. I tend to
learn a new programming language every one or two years, and nothing has
surpassed Go as far as ease in going from 0-1. I was feeling proficient in Go
within a day or two, and there are a few reasons for this: 

1. It’s now a mature language, with a rich community and ecosystem of open
   source libraries. There’s plenty of code out there to look at and learn from.
2. It’s garbage-collected, so unlike Rust or Zig there’s no need to worry
   about memory management, but you get *close* to the same level of
   performance. 
3. It’s kind of a “boring” language, which I love. It has very few bells and
   whistles, so there’s typically only one way to write anything. There’s no
   pressure to be fancy, because you can't. It doesn't even have a ternary
   operator.

I’m using Go, along with [HTMX](https://htmx.org), to build an RSS reader for
myself as a hobby project. I'm exploring how to integrate LLMs with the blog
reading experience in a way that's value additive and beneficial. It’s been a
nice opportunity to exercise my development skills (since I no longer do this in
my day job) and build a useful tool for myself. I’m really excited on how it’s
progressing; more on this project later.

---

In May, I started reading more deeply in Stoic philosophy. It all began with
William Irvine’s [A Guide to the Good
Life](https://bookshop.org/p/books/a-guide-to-the-good-life-the-ancient-art-of-stoic-joy-william-b-irvine/7418429?ean=9780195374612),
which I picked up on a whim, and that led me down the path of reading early
Stoic philosophers, primarily Seneca and Epictetus. As a long-time Zen
practitioner, Stoicism strikes me as astonishingly compatible with and
complimentary to Zen practice. Both philosophies focus on cultivating inner
tranquility and personal liberation, but whereas Zen advocates for
"non-rational" approaches of mindfulness and meditation, Stoicism pushes
rational techniques like negative visualization.  Combined, each practice plays
on and adds value to the other in ways I've found already beneficial in my own
life.

Despite its growing popularity, I feel Stoicism remains mostly misunderstood.
It's not just grim-faced resolve, pessimism and grit in the face of adversity.
Rather, like Zen, it's a practice and outlook that ultimately leads to greater
joy, appreciation and deep life satisfaction.

---

In May I also read
[Technofeudalism](https://bookshop.org/p/books/technofeudalism-what-killed-capitalism-yanis-varoufakis/20435382?ean=9781685891244),
which argues that we've moved beyond the age of capitalism to a post-capitalist
world centered on rent extraction rather than profit-seeking, with owners of
"cloud capital" (i.e. computing infrastructure) reaping the rewards of this
economic transformation.  I stumbled on the writing of Yanis Varoufakis during
the peak of the Web3/blockchain hype-cycle, but until this book I hadn't read
much of his work beyond a few articles. Lots of really insightful writing on
economics and what Varoufakis calls the "dual nature of money," including a
solid primer on economic history that I found very helpful. If there's one area
I found the book lacking, though, it was its treatment of technical developments
in cloud computing, which were almost too cursory given the thesis.

---

In podcasts, I started listening to [The
Gradient](https://thegradient.pub/about/), a podcast on AI. Not every episode is
a winner, but if you're looking for a podcast that goes deep on AI in new and
interesting and balanced ways, it's a good one. I really enjoyed [the interview
with Sasha
Luccioni](https://thegradientpub.substack.com/p/sasha-luccioni-ai-climate-change-bias-ethics)
on the environmental impacts of AI. One thing really stood out in listening:
[Jevon’s paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jevons_paradox) is a real
problem for AI sustainability, because as models get more efficient and faster,
and as more compute becomes readily available, demand simply increases with
supply. We aren’t really reaping any energy benefits from increased efficiency.
(And even if we could, the real carbon cost comes from hardware production
anyway, and good luck getting data on that!)

